Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: gas analysis.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is meant by gas analysis in anaesthesia, and why does it matter?
Gas analysis in anaesthesia refers to the measurement of the composition of the
respired and anaesthetic gases — the concentrations of oxygen, carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile anaesthetic agents in the inspired and expired gas —
and it matters because the continuous knowledge of what the patient is breathing
and exhaling is fundamental to the safe conduct of anaesthesia.
During anaesthesia the patient breathes a mixture of gases delivered by the
anaesthetic machine and breathing system,
and the safe management of the anaesthetic depends on knowing the composition of
that mixture: the inspired oxygen concentration, to guarantee an adequate,
non-hypoxic supply; the carbon dioxide, to monitor ventilation and rebreathing;
the concentration of the volatile agent, inspired and end-tidal,
to titrate the depth of anaesthesia against the minimum alveolar concentration;
and the nitrous oxide concentration where it is used.
Continuous gas analysis therefore underpins several mandatory monitoring functions
— oxygen analysis to prevent the delivery of a hypoxic mixture,
agent analysis to control anaesthetic depth and prevent both awareness and
overdose, and carbon dioxide analysis as capnography.
It also allows the safe use of low-flow anaesthesia,
in which the inspired concentrations differ from the fresh-gas settings and must be
measured.
The measurement of these gases relies on a range of physical principles exploiting
the distinctive physical and chemical properties of each gas.
So gas analysis is the continuous measurement of the oxygen, carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and volatile-agent concentrations in the respired gas,
and it matters because it guarantees a non-hypoxic inspired oxygen,
monitors ventilation and rebreathing,
allows the titration of anaesthetic depth against the minimum alveolar
concentration, and enables the safe conduct of low-flow anaesthesia — relying on
physical principles specific to each gas.
What physical properties can be exploited to measure a gas?
A gas can be measured by exploiting any physical or chemical property that
distinguishes it from the others and that varies in proportion to its
concentration, and surveying these properties provides a framework for
understanding the various analysers, each of which is suited to particular gases.
The properties exploited fall into several groups.
Optical properties are widely used:
the absorption of infrared radiation by molecules with dissimilar atoms,
used for carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and the volatile agents;
and the absorption or scattering of other radiation,
as in ultraviolet absorption and Raman scattering.
Magnetic properties are exploited for oxygen,
which is unusual in being strongly paramagnetic, attracted into a magnetic field,
a property few other gases share.
Chemical and electrochemical properties are used:
the oxygen of a sample can be measured by electrochemical cells,
the fuel cell and the polarographic electrode,
in which oxygen takes part in a reaction generating a current.
Physical properties such as the differing thermal conductivity, density,
viscosity and solubility of gases, and the speed of sound through them,
can be used to distinguish gases.
Mass, or more precisely the mass-to-charge ratio,
is exploited in mass spectrometry, which can measure all the gases.
Each analyser selects a property by which its target gas can be distinguished and
quantified.
So a gas can be measured by exploiting its optical absorption,
as for carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and volatile agents by infrared;
its magnetic susceptibility, as for paramagnetic oxygen;
its electrochemical reactivity, as for oxygen by fuel and polarographic cells;
its physical properties such as thermal conductivity,
density and the speed of sound; and its mass-to-charge ratio in mass spectrometry —
each analyser using the property that best distinguishes its target gas.
Describe the paramagnetic analysis of oxygen.
The paramagnetic analyser is the principal physical method for measuring oxygen,
exploiting the unusual paramagnetism of the oxygen molecule,
and it is important because it provides a fast, accurate,
continuous measurement of oxygen suited to breath-by-breath analysis.
The principle rests on the fact that oxygen is strongly paramagnetic — it is
attracted into a magnetic field — because of the two unpaired electrons in its
molecular structure, a property shared by very few other gases,
while most respiratory gases, including nitrogen,
carbon dioxide and the anaesthetic agents, are weakly diamagnetic and are repelled.
Oxygen is therefore almost uniquely identifiable by its magnetic behaviour.
In the modern fast paramagnetic analyser,
the sample gas and a reference gas are passed on either side of a sensitive
pressure transducer, and a rapidly switched magnetic field is applied;
the paramagnetic oxygen is drawn into the field,
and because the oxygen concentrations on the two sides differ,
a pulsating pressure difference is generated in time with the switching of the
field, the magnitude of which is proportional to the difference in oxygen
concentration, and so to the oxygen concentration of the sample.
This is measured by the transducer. The fast paramagnetic analyser responds rapidly
enough to follow the breath-by-breath changes in oxygen,
allowing the display of inspired and end-tidal oxygen and an oxygen waveform.
An older form used a dumb-bell suspended in the field.
So the paramagnetic analyser measures oxygen by its strong paramagnetism — its
attraction into a magnetic field owing to two unpaired electrons,
unlike the diamagnetic other gases — the modern form applying a switched magnetic
field and detecting the resulting pressure difference proportional to the oxygen
concentration, fast enough to display breath-by-breath inspired and end-tidal
oxygen.
Describe the electrochemical methods of measuring oxygen.
Oxygen may also be measured by electrochemical methods,
of which there are two principal types — the fuel cell and the polarographic,
or Clark, electrode — and these are important because they are simple,
robust devices long used to monitor inspired oxygen and to measure oxygen in blood
and gas.
The fuel cell, or galvanic cell, is a self-powered electrochemical device
resembling a battery: it contains a lead anode and a precious-metal cathode in an
electrolyte, separated from the gas by a membrane permeable to oxygen;
oxygen diffusing in is reduced at the cathode,
and the resulting chemical reaction generates an electrical current proportional to
the partial pressure of oxygen, which is measured.
The fuel cell requires no external power but is consumed by the reaction and so has
a limited life, becoming exhausted and needing replacement.
Its response is relatively slow, so it is used to measure the average inspired
oxygen rather than breath-by-breath changes.
The polarographic, or Clark, electrode also has a cathode and anode in an
electrolyte behind an oxygen-permeable membrane,
but it requires an external polarising voltage applied across the electrodes;
under this voltage, oxygen reaching the cathode is reduced,
generating a current proportional to the partial pressure of oxygen.
The Clark electrode is used in blood-gas analysers to measure the oxygen tension of
a blood sample, and in some gas analysers. Both depend on the partial pressure of
oxygen.
So oxygen is measured electrochemically by the fuel cell,
a self-powered galvanic device generating a current as oxygen is reduced,
simple but consumed and slow, used for inspired oxygen;
and by the polarographic Clark electrode,
which uses an applied voltage to reduce oxygen and generate a proportional current,
used to measure the oxygen tension in blood and gas — both responding to the
partial pressure of oxygen.
Why is the inspired oxygen analyser so important, and where is it placed?
The continuous analysis of the inspired oxygen concentration is one of the most
important safety functions of gas analysis,
because its purpose is to guarantee that the patient is never delivered a hypoxic
gas mixture, and the placement and behaviour of the analyser follow from this
purpose.
The fundamental hazard it guards against is the delivery to the patient of a gas
mixture containing too little oxygen — a hypoxic mixture — which could arise from a
fault in the gas supply, a misconnection, an error in the flow settings, or,
in a low-flow circle system, from the inspired oxygen falling below the fresh-gas
setting as oxygen is consumed.
Such a hypoxic mixture, if undetected, rapidly causes catastrophic hypoxaemia.
The oxygen analyser continuously measures the oxygen concentration of the gas the
patient is actually breathing and sounds an alarm if it falls below a set
threshold, conventionally around twenty-five to thirty per cent or as set,
providing the essential last line of defence against a hypoxic mixture,
independent of the machine's own anti-hypoxia devices.
For this reason it is placed in the inspiratory limb,
measuring the gas being delivered to the patient — either in the inspiratory limb
of the breathing system or at the common gas outlet — so that it measures the
inspired rather than the expired oxygen.
A low inspired-oxygen alarm must always be enabled.
So the inspired oxygen analyser is essential because it guarantees against the
delivery of a hypoxic mixture from supply faults, misconnection,
flow errors or oxygen consumption in low-flow systems;
it is placed in the inspiratory limb or at the common gas outlet to measure the gas
actually delivered to the patient, with a low-oxygen alarm always enabled as the
last line of defence against hypoxia.
Explain the infrared analysis of carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile agents.
Infrared absorption is the principle underlying the analysis of carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile anaesthetic agents in the modern multi-gas analyser,
and understanding it explains how a single technique measures several of the most
important gases.
The principle, as discussed for capnography,
is that molecules composed of dissimilar atoms — carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile agents,
but not the symmetrical oxygen and nitrogen — absorb infrared radiation at
wavelengths characteristic of each molecule,
the absorption being proportional to the concentration by the Beer-Lambert
relationship.
Each of these gases has its own characteristic absorption wavelength or band:
carbon dioxide at about four point three micrometres,
nitrous oxide at about four point five micrometres,
and the volatile agents in a band around three point three micrometres,
where the carbon-hydrogen bonds absorb.
The multi-gas analyser passes infrared radiation through the gas sample and
measures the absorption at several selected wavelengths,
using filters or a spectrum, so that carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile agent are each measured by the absorption at their
respective wavelengths.
The volatile agents share a similar absorption band,
so a simple analyser may measure the total agent concentration,
while more sophisticated analysers,
measuring at several wavelengths across the band,
can identify which agent is present and measure each separately,
allowing automatic agent identification.
Oxygen, being diamagnetic and not absorbing infrared,
is measured separately by the paramagnetic or electrochemical method.
So infrared absorption measures carbon dioxide at about four point three
micrometres, nitrous oxide at about four point five micrometres,
and the volatile agents in a band around three point three micrometres,
the absorption indicating concentration;
a multi-gas analyser measures several wavelengths to quantify each gas and,
with sufficient wavelengths, to identify the volatile agent,
oxygen being measured separately.
How can the analyser distinguish and identify the volatile agents?
The identification of the specific volatile agent present,
and the measurement of its concentration,
is an important capability of the modern agent analyser,
because the agents differ greatly in potency and the correct interpretation of the
concentration in terms of the minimum alveolar concentration requires knowing which
agent it is, and explaining how this is achieved illustrates the sophistication of
infrared analysis.
The volatile agents — for example isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane — all contain carbon-hydrogen and carbon-halogen bonds
and absorb infrared radiation in a similar band around three point three
micrometres, so that a simple single-wavelength analyser can detect the presence
and total amount of volatile agent but cannot tell which agent it is.
However, although their absorption bands overlap,
the detailed shape of each agent's absorption spectrum across the band differs,
each agent having a characteristic pattern of absorption at different wavelengths
within the band.
A more sophisticated analyser measures the absorption at several wavelengths across
this band and compares the pattern with the known spectra of the individual agents,
thereby identifying which agent is present and measuring its concentration;
some analysers can even detect and quantify a mixture of two agents.
Once the agent is identified, the analyser can express the concentration as a
fraction of that agent's minimum alveolar concentration,
correcting for the patient's age, which directly informs the depth of anaesthesia.
Automatic agent identification also prevents errors when an agent is changed or the
wrong vaporiser is used.
So the analyser identifies the volatile agent by measuring infrared absorption at
several wavelengths across the shared band and matching the characteristic spectral
pattern to the known agents, distinguishing isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane and measuring each;
this allows the concentration to be expressed as a fraction of the agent's minimum
alveolar concentration and prevents agent errors.
What other methods of multi-gas analysis have been used?
Besides the combination of infrared,
paramagnetic and electrochemical analysers used in modern monitors,
several other methods of multi-gas analysis have been used,
principally the mass spectrometer and the Raman spectrometer,
and a knowledge of these illustrates alternative principles and the evolution of
gas monitoring.
The mass spectrometer is a powerful instrument that can measure all the respiratory
and anaesthetic gases simultaneously.
It works by ionising the sample gas,
accelerating the resulting ions through a magnetic or electric field that deflects
them according to their mass-to-charge ratio, and detecting the separated ions,
the amount of each indicating the concentration of each gas of that mass.
The mass spectrometer is accurate and comprehensive but large and expensive,
and was historically used as a shared,
multiplexed system serving several theatres in turn through a sampling network,
with an inherent delay.
The Raman spectrometer measures gases by Raman scattering:
when laser light passes through the gas,
a small fraction is scattered at shifted wavelengths characteristic of each
molecule's vibrational and rotational energy,
the Raman shift identifying the gas and the intensity its concentration;
the Raman analyser could measure all the gases including oxygen and nitrogen from a
single sample.
Both have largely been superseded for routine clinical use by the compact
combination of infrared and paramagnetic analysers in the modern monitor,
which is smaller, cheaper and adequate,
but they illustrate comprehensive analysis from a single sample.
So besides the standard infrared-plus-paramagnetic monitor,
multi-gas analysis has used the mass spectrometer,
which separates ionised gases by mass-to-charge ratio and measures all gases,
historically multiplexed between theatres; and the Raman spectrometer,
which identifies gases by the wavelength shift of scattered laser light — both
comprehensive but now largely superseded by the compact modern combination.
How is nitrogen measured, and why might that be useful?
The measurement of nitrogen, although not a routine function of the standard
anaesthetic gas monitor, has particular uses,
and understanding how it is measured and why illustrates a further application of
gas analysis.
Nitrogen, like oxygen, is a symmetrical molecule that does not absorb infrared
radiation, so it cannot be measured by the infrared analyser;
it was measurable by the comprehensive mass spectrometer and Raman analysers,
and historically by a dedicated nitrogen meter using the emission of light from
nitrogen in an electrical discharge.
The clinical usefulness of measuring nitrogen lies chiefly in two areas.
First, the detection of air entrainment or embolism:
the appearance of nitrogen in the expired gas of a patient breathing a
nitrogen-free mixture indicates that air has entered the system or the circulation,
so a sudden rise in expired nitrogen can signal venous air embolism,
complementing the fall in end-tidal carbon dioxide.
Second, the monitoring of denitrogenation, or nitrogen washout,
during pre-oxygenation: as a patient breathes one hundred per cent oxygen before
induction, the nitrogen is progressively washed out of the lungs,
and the fall in expired nitrogen, or rise in expired oxygen,
indicates the completeness of pre-oxygenation.
Nitrogen washout has also been used to measure the functional residual capacity.
The disappearance of nitrogen confirms a fully oxygen-filled lung.
So nitrogen, not being infrared-absorbing, was measured by mass spectrometry,
Raman analysis or a dedicated nitrogen meter;
its measurement is useful to detect air entrainment or venous air embolism by the
appearance of expired nitrogen, and to monitor denitrogenation during
pre-oxygenation and to measure the functional residual capacity by nitrogen washout.
Compare the response times and suitability of the different analysers.
The different gas analysers vary considerably in their response times and other
characteristics, and comparing them according to whether they can follow the rapid
breath-by-breath changes in gas concentration,
and to their other practical features,
guides the understanding of which analyser is used for which purpose.
The key distinction is between fast analysers,
which respond quickly enough to display the inspired and end-tidal concentrations
and the waveform within a breath, and slow analysers,
which give only an average value.
The fast analysers are the infrared analysers for carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the agents, the fast paramagnetic oxygen analyser,
the mass spectrometer and the Raman analyser;
these respond within a fraction of a second and so can show the breath-by-breath
waveform and distinguish inspired from end-tidal values,
which is essential for capnography and agent monitoring.
The slow analysers are the electrochemical oxygen cells — the fuel cell and the
Clark electrode — which respond over seconds and so give the average or inspired
concentration but cannot follow the breath;
the fuel cell is used to monitor the average inspired oxygen.
In a sidestream system, the overall response is also affected by the transit delay
and the mixing in the sampling line.
Other considerations are accuracy, specificity, the need for calibration, size,
cost, and consumption — the fuel cell being consumed,
the paramagnetic and infrared analysers being durable.
So the infrared, fast paramagnetic, mass-spectrometer and Raman analysers are fast,
displaying breath-by-breath inspired and end-tidal values and waveforms,
suited to carbon dioxide, agent and oxygen monitoring;
the electrochemical oxygen cells are slow, giving average or inspired oxygen;
and the sidestream transit delay, accuracy, calibration needs, size,
cost and consumption further distinguish them in suitability.
What are the sources of error and the calibration requirements in gas analysis?
Gas analysis is subject to a number of sources of error and requires appropriate
calibration, and an awareness of these ensures accurate readings and the safe use
of the monitors, since erroneous gas concentrations could mislead the conduct of
anaesthesia.
A first group of errors is interference between gases.
In infrared analysis, gases with overlapping absorption bands interfere:
nitrous oxide and water vapour can affect the carbon dioxide reading,
and the broadening of absorption bands by other gases — collision, or pressure,
broadening, notably the effect of nitrous oxide on carbon dioxide — causes error,
for which modern analysers compensate.
The presence of one agent can affect the reading of another unless the analyser
identifies them. In paramagnetic oxygen analysis,
water vapour and the small paramagnetism of other species can cause minor error.
A second group concerns the sample:
water vapour and condensation must be removed or accounted for,
since water absorbs infrared and can block sampling lines;
the partial pressure or concentration measured depends on the total pressure,
so changes in atmospheric or sampling-line pressure cause error and must be
corrected.
A third concerns the device: zero drift and gain drift require regular calibration
against known gas mixtures and zeroing against a gas free of the analyte,
and the non-linear infrared response must be linearised.
The fuel cell is consumed and must be checked and replaced.
So gas-analysis errors arise from interference between gases with overlapping
infrared bands and from collision broadening,
from water vapour and pressure effects on the sample, and from zero and gain drift;
they are managed by gas compensation, water removal, pressure correction,
regular calibration against known and analyte-free gases, linearisation,
and replacement of consumed cells.
How does gas analysis support low-flow anaesthesia?
Gas analysis is essential to the safe conduct of low-flow anaesthesia,
and explaining this relationship illustrates the practical importance of measuring
the inspired and expired gas concentrations and shows why low-flow techniques
became safe only once comprehensive gas analysis was available.
In low-flow anaesthesia, the fresh-gas flow delivered to the circle breathing
system is less than the patient's minute ventilation,
so that a large proportion of the expired gas, after carbon-dioxide absorption,
is rebreathed.
This economical and environmentally favourable technique has an important
consequence: because much of the gas is recirculated and the patient continuously
consumes oxygen and takes up anaesthetic agent,
the concentrations of oxygen and agent in the gas the patient actually inspires
differ from, and are lower than, the concentrations set on the flowmeters and
vaporiser.
At low flows the inspired oxygen concentration tends to fall as oxygen is consumed
and the inspired agent concentration lags the vaporiser setting.
Therefore the fresh-gas settings no longer reliably indicate what the patient is
breathing, and the only safe way to conduct low-flow anaesthesia is to measure the
inspired gas directly: continuous analysis of the inspired oxygen guards against a
hypoxic mixture developing as oxygen is consumed,
and continuous analysis of the inspired and end-tidal agent allows the depth of
anaesthesia to be controlled despite the lag.
Carbon dioxide analysis confirms the absorbent is working.
Thus gas analysis makes low-flow anaesthesia safe.
So gas analysis supports low-flow anaesthesia by directly measuring the inspired
gas, which at low flows differs from the fresh-gas settings as the patient consumes
oxygen and takes up agent: inspired-oxygen analysis guards against a developing
hypoxic mixture, inspired and end-tidal agent analysis controls depth despite the
lag, and carbon dioxide analysis confirms absorption — making the economical
low-flow technique safe.
Briefly, how are gases measured in blood, and how does that relate to gas analysis?
The measurement of gases dissolved in blood — the blood-gas analysis performed on
an arterial sample — is closely related to the analysis of respired gases,
sharing some principles, and a brief account relates the two and completes the
picture of gas measurement in anaesthesia.
The blood-gas analyser measures the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide
and the pH of a blood sample, using electrodes.
The oxygen tension is measured by the polarographic Clark electrode,
the same principle as the gas-phase oxygen electrode,
in which oxygen is reduced at a cathode under an applied voltage,
generating a current proportional to the oxygen tension.
The carbon dioxide tension is measured by the Severinghaus electrode,
in which carbon dioxide diffuses across a membrane into a bicarbonate solution,
changing its pH, which is measured by a pH electrode,
the pH change reflecting the carbon dioxide tension.
The pH itself is measured by a glass pH electrode.
From these measured values, the analyser calculates the derived bicarbonate and
base excess.
Modern analysers also incorporate a co-oximeter,
measuring the haemoglobin and its saturation and the dyshaemoglobins by
multi-wavelength spectrophotometry.
The relationship to respired-gas analysis is that both measure the same gases by
related principles — the oxygen electrode and infrared and electrochemical methods
— and the respired end-tidal values are interpreted against the arterial blood-gas
values, the gradients between them being informative.
So blood-gas analysis measures the oxygen tension by the polarographic Clark
electrode, the carbon dioxide tension by the Severinghaus electrode through its pH
change, and the pH by a glass electrode, calculating bicarbonate and base excess,
with co-oximetry for saturation; it shares principles with respired-gas analysis,
and the end-tidal and arterial values are interpreted together.
Summarise the clinical applications and the configuration of the modern gas monitor.
Drawing the applications together, the modern anaesthetic gas monitor combines
several analysers to provide continuous measurement of all the relevant gases,
and summarising its configuration and uses shows how the principles discussed are
integrated into a single essential monitor.
The modern monitor is typically a sidestream device,
aspirating a continuous sample from the patient connection through a sampling line,
with a water trap, to a bench of analysers:
an infrared analyser measuring carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and the volatile agent, with automatic agent identification;
a fast paramagnetic analyser, or sometimes an electrochemical cell,
measuring oxygen; and the necessary processing and display.
From these it displays, continuously and breath by breath,
the inspired and end-tidal oxygen, carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide and agent concentrations,
the agent identity and its value in fractions of the minimum alveolar
concentration, and the capnogram.
Its clinical applications are: guaranteeing a non-hypoxic inspired oxygen;
capnography for ventilation, the airway and circulation;
titration of anaesthetic depth by the end-tidal agent against the age-adjusted
minimum alveolar concentration, preventing both awareness and overdose;
the safe conduct of low-flow anaesthesia; detection of agent and gas errors;
and detection of events such as air embolism.
With its alarms, it is a mandatory monitor.
So the modern gas monitor is a sidestream device combining infrared analysis of
carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and agents with paramagnetic or electrochemical
oxygen analysis, displaying inspired and end-tidal concentrations,
agent identity and minimum-alveolar-concentration fractions and the capnogram;
it guarantees a non-hypoxic oxygen, monitors ventilation, titrates depth,
enables low-flow anaesthesia and detects errors and events — an essential,
integrated monitor.
What safety considerations attend gas analysis?
The safe use of gas analysis depends on appreciating both the safety functions it
serves and the hazards of the equipment, and a brief account completes the station.
The foremost safety point is that gas analysis provides several essential
protections that must be active and heeded:
the inspired-oxygen analyser with its low-oxygen alarm is the last line of defence
against a hypoxic mixture and must always be enabled;
the agent analyser guards against both awareness, from too little agent,
and overdose, from too much, and against the wrong agent;
and capnography guards the airway and ventilation.
Failing to enable the alarms, or ignoring them, removes these protections.
The equipment has minor hazards: the aspirated sidestream sample,
containing anaesthetic agents, must be scavenged or returned and not vented into
theatre; the continuous aspiration of sample gas,
often around one hundred and fifty to two hundred millilitres per minute,
can affect ventilation in neonates and in low-flow systems and must be accounted
for; water and condensation must be managed to prevent blockage and error;
and the analysers require calibration and maintenance to remain accurate.
Infection control requires appropriate sampling lines and filters.
The readings must be interpreted in context,
allowing for the transit delay and for the conditions that cause error.
So the key safety considerations are that the protective functions — the
inspired-oxygen alarm against hypoxia,
agent analysis against awareness and overdose,
and capnography — must be enabled and heeded; while the equipment's minor hazards,
the scavenging of sample gas, the aspirated volume in small patients,
water management, calibration, and infection control, are readily managed.
Finally, draw the station together.
Drawing the station together, gas analysis is the continuous measurement of the
composition of the respired and anaesthetic gases,
and it is fundamental to the safe conduct of modern anaesthesia.
Each gas is measured by a method exploiting its distinctive physical or chemical
property: oxygen by its paramagnetism or by electrochemical fuel and polarographic
cells; carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and the volatile agents by their
characteristic infrared absorption,
the multi-wavelength analyser identifying the agent and expressing its
concentration in fractions of the minimum alveolar concentration; and,
comprehensively, by mass spectrometry and Raman scattering.
The infrared and fast paramagnetic analysers respond breath by breath,
displaying inspired and end-tidal values,
while the electrochemical oxygen cells give average values.
The measurements guarantee a non-hypoxic inspired oxygen through the
inspired-oxygen alarm, monitor ventilation and the airway through capnography,
titrate anaesthetic depth, and make low-flow anaesthesia safe,
while the related blood-gas analysis measures the dissolved gases by electrodes.
Errors from gas interference, water vapour,
pressure and drift are managed by compensation and calibration.
So gas analysis unites a range of physical principles — magnetic, optical,
electrochemical and mass-based — to measure each respiratory and anaesthetic gas,
providing the continuous knowledge of inspired and expired composition that
guarantees oxygenation, controls anaesthetic depth,
monitors ventilation and enables low-flow anaesthesia,
making it one of the indispensable foundations of safe anaesthetic practice.
Describe the sampling system of a sidestream gas analyser.
The sampling system of the sidestream gas analyser — the arrangement by which a
continuous sample of gas is drawn from the patient to the remote analyser — is an
important practical aspect, because its design governs the response time,
the handling of water, and the fate of the sampled gas,
all of which affect the measurement and safety.
The system begins at a sampling port at the patient connection,
near the tracheal tube or airway, from which a fine-bore sampling tube conducts the
gas to the monitor.
A pump within the monitor aspirates the sample continuously at a defined rate,
typically around one hundred and fifty to two hundred millilitres per minute,
drawing gas through the line to the analyser cells.
Because expired gas is warm and fully saturated with water vapour,
water management is essential: the sampling line is made of a material that allows
some water vapour to permeate out, and a water trap,
or a section of permeable tubing, removes condensed water before it reaches and
damages the analyser or blocks the line.
The continuous aspiration of gas must be accounted for,
since in a neonate or a low-flow circle it represents a significant proportion of
the gas flow and can affect ventilation or the circuit; the sampled gas,
containing anaesthetic agents, is then either scavenged or, in some monitors,
returned to the breathing system to conserve it.
The transit time through the line introduces a delay between the breath and its
analysis.
So the sidestream sampling system draws gas through a fine line from a port at the
patient, aspirated continuously at about one hundred and fifty to two hundred
millilitres per minute by a pump; a water trap or permeable tubing removes water to
protect the analyser, the aspirated volume must be accounted for in neonates and
low-flow systems, the agent-containing sample is scavenged or returned,
and the transit through the line causes a measurement delay.
Distinguish gas concentration from partial pressure, and the effect of water vapour.
The distinction between the concentration, or fractional content,
of a gas and its partial pressure, and the effect of water vapour on these,
is conceptually important in gas analysis,
because the analyser may report either quantity and the two behave differently with
changes in pressure and humidity, which can cause confusion and error.
The partial pressure of a gas is the pressure it exerts within the mixture,
equal to the total pressure multiplied by its fractional content, by Dalton's law;
the concentration, or fractional content,
is the proportion of the mixture made up of that gas,
expressed as a fraction or per cent.
The two are related through the total pressure,
so a given fractional content corresponds to a higher partial pressure at higher
total pressure.
This matters because some analysers fundamentally respond to partial pressure — the
infrared and the paramagnetic analysers respond to the number of molecules in the
light path or field, that is, to partial pressure — while the clinically familiar
value is often the concentration; the conversion depends on the total pressure,
so the analyser must know or assume the ambient pressure,
and a change in pressure causes error if not corrected.
Water vapour exerts its own partial pressure and dilutes the other gases:
saturated expired gas contains water vapour at about six point three kilopascals at
body temperature, which lowers the partial pressures and fractional contents of the
other gases compared with dry gas.
Analysers may report values on a wet or dry basis,
and the removal or accounting of water vapour is necessary for consistency.
So partial pressure is the total pressure times the fractional content,
the two related through total pressure,
with infrared and paramagnetic analysers responding fundamentally to partial
pressure and so requiring pressure correction;
water vapour exerts its own partial pressure and dilutes the other gases,
so its presence lowers their values and must be accounted for,
the analyser reporting on a defined wet or dry basis.
How does gas analysis contribute to occupational and environmental safety?
Gas analysis contributes importantly to occupational and environmental safety in
the operating theatre, beyond its role in patient monitoring,
and an account of this completes the picture of why measuring the anaesthetic gases
matters.
The first contribution is to the control of theatre pollution by waste anaesthetic
gases.
Anaesthetic agents and nitrous oxide leaking or vented into the theatre atmosphere
expose staff to low concentrations chronically, which is undesirable,
and occupational exposure limits are set for these agents.
Gas analysis allows the monitoring of the concentrations of agents and nitrous
oxide in the theatre atmosphere, verifying that scavenging is effective and that
exposure remains within limits, and detecting leaks.
The second contribution is to the efficiency and environmental impact of
anaesthesia: the volatile agents and nitrous oxide are greenhouse gases,
and the accurate measurement of inspired and expired agent concentrations enables
low-flow and minimal-flow anaesthesia,
which greatly reduces the quantity of agent used and released,
lessening both cost and environmental harm;
agent analysis is essential to conducting these economical techniques safely,
as discussed.
The third is the proper functioning of the sampling and scavenging of the
analyser's own sample gas, which must be scavenged or returned rather than vented.
Thus gas analysis supports a safe and sustainable theatre environment.
So gas analysis contributes to occupational and environmental safety by monitoring
theatre pollution with anaesthetic agents and nitrous oxide to verify scavenging
and keep staff exposure within limits,
by enabling low-flow anaesthesia that reduces the use and release of these
greenhouse agents, and by ensuring its own sample gas is scavenged or returned —
supporting a safe and sustainable theatre.
Thank you. A thorough and accomplished account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Gas analysis continuously measures the inspired and expired oxygen,
carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and volatile agents - each by a method exploiting a
distinctive property: OXYGEN by paramagnetism (strongly attracted into a magnetic
field, owing to two unpaired electrons - the modern fast paramagnetic analyser) or
by electrochemical cells; CO2, N2O and AGENTS by characteristic infrared absorption
(CO2 ~4.3, N2O ~4.5, agents ~3.3 micrometres).
Second, Electrochemical oxygen cells: the FUEL (galvanic) cell is self-powered,
generates a current as oxygen is reduced - simple but consumed and slow,
used for average inspired oxygen; the polarographic CLARK electrode needs an
applied voltage and measures oxygen tension in blood and gas.
Third, The INSPIRED OXYGEN analyser (in the inspiratory limb/common gas outlet,
with a low-oxygen alarm) is the essential last line of defence against a hypoxic
mixture; multi-wavelength infrared agent analysis IDENTIFIES the volatile agent
(isoflurane/sevoflurane/desflurane by their spectral pattern) and expresses its
end-tidal concentration as a fraction of the age-adjusted MAC - guarding against
both awareness and overdose.
Fourth, Fast analysers (infrared, fast paramagnetic, mass spectrometer,
Raman) show breath-by-breath inspired/end-tidal values and waveforms;
slow electrochemical cells give average values;
mass spectrometry (separates ionised gases by mass-to-charge ratio) and Raman
scattering measure ALL gases including oxygen and nitrogen but are largely
superseded by the compact infrared+paramagnetic monitor.
Nitrogen measurement detects air embolism and monitors
denitrogenation/pre-oxygenation.
Fifth, Gas analysis makes LOW-FLOW anaesthesia safe because at low flows the
inspired concentrations differ from the fresh-gas settings (oxygen consumed,
agent taken up): inspired-oxygen analysis prevents a hypoxic mixture,
inspired/end-tidal agent analysis controls depth despite the lag.
Errors arise from gas interference/collision broadening (N2O on CO2), water vapour,
pressure and drift - managed by compensation, water traps,
calibration against known/analyte-free gases and linearisation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.